---
title: ndctl
layout: pmdk
---

NAME
====

ndctl-sanitize-dimm - Perform a cryptographic destruction or overwrite
of the contents of the given NVDIMM(s)

SYNOPSIS
========

>     ndctl sanitize-dimm <nmem0> [<nmem1>..<nmemN>] [<options>]

DESCRIPTION
===========

The *sanitize-dimm* command performs a cryptographic destruction of the
contents of the given NVDIMM. It scrambles the data, and any metadata or
info-blocks, but it doesn’t modify namespace labels. Therefore, any
namespaces on regions associated with the given NVDIMM will be retained,
but they will end up in the *raw* mode.

Additionally, after completion of this command, the security and
passphrase for the given NVDIMM will be disabled, and the passphrase and
any key material will also be removed from the keyring and the ndctl
keys directory at /etc/ndctl/keys

The command supports two different methods of performing the
cryptographic erase. The default is *crypto-erase*, but additionally, an
*overwrite* option is available which overwrites not only the data area,
but also the label area, thus losing record of any namespaces the given
NVDIMM participates in.

OPTIONS
=======

`<dimm>`  
A *nmemX* device name, or a dimm id number. Restrict the operation to
the specified dimm(s). The keyword *all* can be specified to indicate
the lack of any restriction, however this is the same as not supplying a
--dimm option at all.

`-b; --bus=`  
A bus id number, or a provider string (e.g. "ACPI.NFIT"). Restrict the
operation to the specified bus(es). The keyword *all* can be specified
to indicate the lack of any restriction, however this is the same as not
supplying a --bus option at all.

`-c; --crypto-erase`  
Replace the media encryption key on the NVDIMM causing all existing data
to read as cipher text with the new key. This does not change label
data. Namespaces get reverted to raw mode.

`-o; --ovewrite`  
Wipe the entire DIMM, including label data. This can take significant
time, and the command is non-blocking. With this option, the overwrite
request is merely submitted to the NVDIMM, and the completion is
asynchronous. Depending on the medium and capacity, overwrite may take
tens of minutes to many hours.

`-m; --master-passphrase`  
Indicate that we are using the master passphrase to perform the erase.
This only is applicable to the *crypto-erase* option.

`-z; --zero-key`  
Passing in a key with payload that is just 0’s.

`--verbose`  
Emit debug messages.

THEORY OF OPERATION
===================

The Intel Device Specific Methods (DSM) specification v1.7 and v1.8
\[1\] introduced the following security management operations: enable
passhprase, update passphrase, unlock DIMM, disable security, freeze
security, secure (crypto) erase, overwrite, master passphrase enable,
master passphrase update, and master passphrase secure erase.

The security management for NVDIMMs is comprised of two parts. The front
end uses the Linux key management framework (trusted and encrypted keys
\[2\]) to store the encrypted passphrases in the kernel-managed keyring.
The interface for this is the *keyutils* utility which uses the key
management APIs in the Linux kernel. The back end takes the decrypted
payload (which is the DIMM passphrase) and passes it to the DIMM.

Unlike other DSMs which are composed by libndctl and sent to the kernel
via an ioctl, the security DSMs are managed through the *security* sysfs
attribute under the *dimm* device. A *key-ID* is written to the
*security* attribute and the kernel pulls the associated key material
from the user keyring that is maintained by the kernel.

The security process begins with the generation of a *master key* that
is used to seal (encrypt) the passphrase for the DIMM. There can either
be one common *master key* that is used to encrypt every DIMM’s
passphrase, or a separate key can be generated for each DIMM. The
*master key* is also referred to as the *key-encryption-key* (kek). The
*kek* can either be generated by the TPM (Trusted Platform Module) on
the system, or alternatively, the *System Master Key* can also be used
as the *kek*

For testing purposes a user key with randomized payload can also be used
as a *kek*. See \[2\] for details. To perform any security operations,
it is expected that the *kek* has been added to the kernel’s user
keyring as shown in example below:

    # keyctl show
    Session Keyring
     736023423 --alswrv      0     0  keyring: _ses
     675104189 --alswrv      0 65534   \_ keyring: _uid.0
     680187394 --alswrv      0     0       \_ trusted: nvdimm-master

Before performing any of the security operations, all the regions
associated with the DIMM in question need to be disabled. For the
*overwrite* operation, in addition to the *regions*, the *dimm* also
needs to be disabled.

\[1\] <http://pmem.io/documents/NVDIMM_DSM_Interface-V1.8.pdf>  
\[2\]
<https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/security/keys/trusted-encrypted.rst>

The following sub-sections describe specifics of each security feature.

UNLOCK
------

Unlock is performed by the kernel, however a preparation step must
happen before the unlock DSM can be issued by the kernel. It is expected
that from the initramfs, a setup command (ndctl *load-keys*) is executed
before the libnvdimm module is loaded by modprobe. This command will
inject the *kek* and the encrypted passphrases into the kernel’s user
keyring. During the *probe* of the libnvdimm driver, it will:

1.  Check the security state of the device and see if the DIMM is locked

2.  Request the associated encrypted passphrase from the kernel’s user
    key ring

3.  Use the *kek* to decrypt the passphrase

4.  Create the unlock DSM, copy the decrypted payload into the DSM

5.  Issue the DSM to unlock the DIMM

If the DIMM is already unlocked, the kernel will attempt to revalidate
the passphrase. If we fail to revalidate the passphrase, the kernel will
freeze the security and disallow any further security configuration
changes. A kernel module parameter is available to override this
behavior.

SETUP USER PASSPHRASE
---------------------

To setup the passphrase for a DIMM, it is expected that the *kek* to be
used is present in the kernel’s user keyring. The *kek* encrypts the
DIMM passphrase using the *enc32* key format. The plaintext passphrase
is never provided by or made visible to the user. It is instead randomly
generated by the kernel and userspace does not have access to it. Upon
encryption, a binary blob of the passphrase is written to the passphrase
blob storage directory (/etc/ndctl/keys). The user is responsible for
backing up the passphrase blobs to a secure location.

UPDATE USER PASSPHRASE
----------------------

The update user passphrase operation uses the same DSM command as enable
user passphrase. Most of the work is done on the key management side.
The user has the option of providing a new *kek* for the new passphrase,
but continuing to use the existing *kek* is also acceptable. The
following operations are performed for *update-passphrase*:

1.  Remove the encrypted passphrase from the kernel’s user keyring.

2.  Rename the passphrase blob to old.

3.  Load this old passphrase blob into the keyring with an "old" name.

4.  Create the new passphrase and encrypt with the *kek*.

5.  Send DSM with the old and new decrypted passphrases.

6.  Remove old passphrase and the passphrase blob from the keyring.

REMOVE USER PASSPHRASE
----------------------

The *key-ID* for the passphrase to be removed is written to sysfs. The
kernel then sends the DSM to disable security, and the passphrase is
then removed from the keyring, and the associated passphrase blob is
deleted.

CRYPTO (SECURE) ERASE
---------------------

This operation is similar to remove-passphrase. The kernel issues a
WBINVD instruction before and after the operation to ensure no data
corruption from a stale CPU cache. Use ndctl’s sanitize-dimm command
with the `--crypto-erase` option to perform this operation.

OVERWRITE
---------

This is invoked using `--overwrite` option for ndctl *sanitize-dimm*.
The overwrite operation wipes the entire NVDIMM. The operation can take
a significant amount of time. NOTE: When the command returns
successfully, it just means overwrite has been successfully started, and
not that the overwrite is complete. Subsequently, 'ndctl
wait-overwrite’can be used to wait for the NVDIMMs that are performing
overwrite. Upon successful completion of an overwrite, the WBINVD
instruction is issued by the kernel. If both --crypto-erase and
--overwrite options are supplied, then crypto-erase is performed before
overwrite.

SECURITY FREEZE
---------------

This operation does not require a passphrase. This will cause any
security command other than a status query to be locked out until the
next boot.

MASTER PASSPHRASE SETUP, UPDATE, and CRYPTO ERASE
-------------------------------------------------

These operations are similar to the user passphrase enable and update.
The only difference is that a different passphrase is used. The master
passphrase has no relation to the master key (*kek*) which is used for
encryption of either passphrase.

COPYRIGHT
=========

Copyright (c) 2016 - 2019, Intel Corporation. License GPLv2: GNU GPL
version 2 <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>. This is free software: you
are free to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the
extent permitted by law.

SEE ALSO
========

[ndctl-wait-overwrite](ndctl-wait-overwrite.md) ,
<https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TCG_SWG_SIIS_Version_1_07_Revision_1_00.pdf>
